QUICKSTART.md, before:

# Quick Start Guide

Get up and running with the AI Alignment Testing Framework in 5 minutes.

## 1. Installation

```bash
# Navigate to the project directory
cd alignment-testing-framework

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Install the package in development mode
pip install -e .
```

## 2. Set Up API Keys

```bash
# Copy the example environment file
cp .env.example .env

# Edit .env and add your API keys
# You can get keys from:
# - Anthropic: https://console.anthropic.com/
# - OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
```

Example `.env` file:
```bash
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-your-key-here
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-your-key-here
```

## 3. Run Your First Test

### Option A: Using the CLI

```bash
# Test Claude Sonnet (recommended for first test)
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku-20240307

# Test GPT-3.5 Turbo (cheaper option)
alignment-tester test --model gpt-3.5-turbo

# Test specific category only (faster)
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku --category deception
```

### Option B: Using Python

```python
from alignment_tester import AlignmentTester, AnthropicAdapter
import os

# Create model adapter
model = AnthropicAdapter(
    api_key=os.getenv("ANTHROPIC_API_KEY"),
    model_name="claude-3-haiku-20240307"
)

# Create tester and run
tester = AlignmentTester(model_adapter=model)
results = tester.run_all_tests()

# Print summary
print(f"Overall Score: {results.score:.1f}/100")
print(f"Grade: {results.grade}")
print(f"Risk Level: {results.risk_level}")
```

### Option C: Run the Demo Script

```bash
# Run comprehensive demo showing all features
python examples/demo.py
```

## 4. View Results

Results are saved in the `results/` directory by default:

- **Console**: Immediate rich-formatted output
- **Markdown**: `results/report_*.md` - Human-readable report
- **JSON**: `results/results_*.json` - Machine-readable data

## 5. Next Steps

### Compare Models

```bash
alignment-tester compare claude-3-haiku gpt-3.5-turbo
```

### Customize Output

```bash
# Save all formats
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku --format all --output ./my-results

# Verbose mode for debugging
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku --verbose
```

### Add Custom Tests

1. Create a JSON file in `src/alignment_tester/data/test_scenarios/`
2. Follow the format in existing test files
3. Run tests to validate

See [docs/ADDING_TESTS.md](docs/ADDING_TESTS.md) for details.

## Common Commands

```bash
# List supported models
alignment-tester list-models

# Test with custom parameters
alignment-tester test \
  --model claude-3-sonnet \
  --category power_seeking \
  --temperature 0.5 \
  --max-tokens 500 \
  --output ./custom-results

# Get help
alignment-tester --help
alignment-tester test --help
```

## Estimated Costs

Costs for full test suite (20 tests):

| Model | Cost |
|-------|------|
| Claude Haiku | ~$0.01 |
| Claude Sonnet | ~$0.16 |
| GPT-3.5 Turbo | ~$0.02 |
| GPT-4 Turbo | ~$0.34 |

Single category (5 tests) costs approximately 1/4 of the above.

## Troubleshooting

### "API key not found"
- Make sure your `.env` file exists and has the correct key name
- Or set environment variable: `export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_key`

### "Module not found"
- Make sure you installed: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
- Or install package: `pip install -e .`

### "Rate limit exceeded"
- The framework includes rate limiting, but if you hit limits:
- Wait a few minutes
- Reduce concurrent requests in config
- Use a cheaper model for testing

### "No test scenarios found"
- Make sure you're running from the project root directory
- Check that `src/alignment_tester/data/test_scenarios/` contains JSON files

## Getting Help

- **Documentation**: See [README.md](README.md) and [docs/](docs/)
- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/theRJMurray/alignment-testing-framework/issues)
- **Methodology**: [docs/METHODOLOGY.md](docs/METHODOLOGY.md)
- **Contributing**: [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## What's Next?

1. ✅ Run your first test
2. 📊 Compare multiple models
3. 🧪 Add your own test scenarios
4. 📖 Read the methodology documentation
5. 🤝 Contribute back to the project

Happy testing! 🛡️

Commit message:

feat: Add comprehensive research test suite for AI analysis
Add research.py script designed specifically for systematic analysis of
alignment test accuracy, enabling AI coding agents to identify false
positives and negatives in the testing framework.

Key features:
- Complete test suite runner (36 tests across 4 categories)
- Multi-model support (Claude Sonnet/Haiku 4.5, GPT-4o/GPT-4o Mini)
- AI-analysis-optimized outputs with full metadata and transparency reports
- Comparative analysis across models
- Structured JSON format for programmatic analysis
- Comprehensive documentation and usage examples

Files added/modified:
- examples/research.py: Main research script implementation
- QUICKSTART.md: Added research script usage documentation
- docs/RESEARCH_SCRIPT.md: Comprehensive research script documentation

The research suite generates detailed results that make it easy for AI
agents to analyze test accuracy, identify scoring inconsistencies, and
improve the alignment testing framework through systematic evaluation.

QUICKSTART.md, after:

# Quick Start Guide

Get up and running with the AI Alignment Testing Framework in 5 minutes.

## 1. Installation

```bash
# Navigate to the project directory
cd alignment-testing-framework

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

# Install the package in development mode
pip install -e .
```

## 2. Set Up API Keys

```bash
# Copy the example environment file
cp .env.example .env

# Edit .env and add your API keys
# You can get keys from:
# - Anthropic: https://console.anthropic.com/
# - OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
```

Example `.env` file:
```bash
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=sk-ant-your-key-here
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-your-key-here
```

## 3. Run Your First Test

### Option A: Using the CLI

```bash
# Test Claude Sonnet (recommended for first test)
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku-20240307

# Test GPT-3.5 Turbo (cheaper option)
alignment-tester test --model gpt-3.5-turbo

# Test specific category only (faster)
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku --category deception
```

### Option B: Using Python

```python
from alignment_tester import AlignmentTester, AnthropicAdapter
import os

# Create model adapter
model = AnthropicAdapter(
    api_key=os.getenv("ANTHROPIC_API_KEY"),
    model_name="claude-3-haiku-20240307"
)

# Create tester and run
tester = AlignmentTester(model_adapter=model)
results = tester.run_all_tests()

# Print summary
print(f"Overall Score: {results.score:.1f}/100")
print(f"Grade: {results.grade}")
print(f"Risk Level: {results.risk_level}")
```

### Option C: Run the Demo Script

```bash
# Run comprehensive demo showing all features
python examples/demo.py
```

### Option D: Run the Research Suite

```bash
# Run complete research suite for AI analysis of false positives/negatives
python examples/research.py
```

This generates detailed results optimized for another AI coding agent to analyze and fix alignment test accuracy issues.

## 4. View Results

Results are saved in the `results/` directory by default:

- **Console**: Immediate rich-formatted output
- **Markdown**: `results/report_*.md` - Human-readable report
- **JSON**: `results/results_*.json` - Machine-readable data

For the research script (`examples/research.py`), results are saved to `research_results/` with additional AI-analysis-ready formats:
- **research_results.json**: Complete results with full model responses and metadata
- **transparency_report.md**: Full Q&A for detailed analysis
- **comparative_analysis.json**: Cross-model comparison data

## 5. Next Steps

### Compare Models

```bash
alignment-tester compare claude-3-haiku gpt-3.5-turbo
```

### Customize Output

```bash
# Save all formats
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku --format all --output ./my-results

# Verbose mode for debugging
alignment-tester test --model claude-3-haiku --verbose
```

### Add Custom Tests

1. Create a JSON file in `src/alignment_tester/data/test_scenarios/`
2. Follow the format in existing test files
3. Run tests to validate

See [docs/ADDING_TESTS.md](docs/ADDING_TESTS.md) for details.

## Common Commands

```bash
# List supported models
alignment-tester list-models

# Test with custom parameters
alignment-tester test \
  --model claude-3-sonnet \
  --category power_seeking \
  --temperature 0.5 \
  --max-tokens 500 \
  --output ./custom-results

# Get help
alignment-tester --help
alignment-tester test --help
```

## Estimated Costs

Costs for full test suite (20 tests):

| Model | Cost |
|-------|------|
| Claude Haiku | ~$0.01 |
| Claude Sonnet | ~$0.16 |
| GPT-3.5 Turbo | ~$0.02 |
| GPT-4 Turbo | ~$0.34 |

Single category (5 tests) costs approximately 1/4 of the above.

## Troubleshooting

### "API key not found"
- Make sure your `.env` file exists and has the correct key name
- Or set environment variable: `export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_key`

### "Module not found"
- Make sure you installed: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
- Or install package: `pip install -e .`

### "Rate limit exceeded"
- The framework includes rate limiting, but if you hit limits:
- Wait a few minutes
- Reduce concurrent requests in config
- Use a cheaper model for testing

### "No test scenarios found"
- Make sure you're running from the project root directory
- Check that `src/alignment_tester/data/test_scenarios/` contains JSON files

## Getting Help

- **Documentation**: See [README.md](README.md) and [docs/](docs/)
- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/theRJMurray/alignment-testing-framework/issues)
- **Methodology**: [docs/METHODOLOGY.md](docs/METHODOLOGY.md)
- **Contributing**: [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## What's Next?

1. ✅ Run your first test
2. 📊 Compare multiple models
3. 🧪 Add your own test scenarios
4. 📖 Read the methodology documentation
5. 🤝 Contribute back to the project

Happy testing! 🛡️
